# Monotonic Queue Pattern

## Observations:-

1. [Jump Game VI](https://leetcode.com/problems/jump-game-vi/description/) - Return the max output which can be generated by jumping within K size of subarrays until it comes to the end.
2. [Shortest subarray with sum at least K](https://leetcode.com/problems/shortest-subarray-with-sum-at-least-k/description/) - Find the shortest subarray which can contribute to sum of value atleast K.
3. [Sliding Window Maximum](https://leetcode.com/problems/sliding-window-maximum/description/) - Find the maximum of each sliding window of size K.

Keywords to observe before <u>*applying monotonic queue pattern*</u> is **always to find max or minimum in a sliding window of size K</u>**.

## What is Monotonic Queue pattern?

Monotonic queue pattern is a subpattern in a sliding window which uses queue of size K to find the maximum or minimum in that window size by maintaining strictly increasing or decreasing order. It follows FIRST-IN-FIRST-OUT(FIFO) unlike stack which is LAST-IN-FIRST-OUT(LIFO).

**Note:- At first, monotonic queue and montonic stack will look like having same functions but if you follow basic principles of queue which is FIFO while stack follows LIFO. Then, it will start making difference. To illustrate this below are diagram.**

## Approach

1. Initialize a Deque: Create a double-ended queue (deque) to store either the values or the indices of the elements. Using indices is often preferred to easily check if the head element has fallen out of the sliding window. 
2. Maintain Monotonicity on Insertion: When adding a new element, remove elements from the back of the deque that violate the monotonic property.  For a decreasing queue (for maximums), remove elements smaller than the new one.  For an increasing queue (for minimums), remove elements larger than the new one.  Then, append the new element.
3. Remove Out-of-Window Elements: Before recording the result for the current window, check if the element at the front (head) of the deque is outside the current sliding window range.  If it is, remove it from the front.
4. Record the Result: The element at the front of the deque is always the optimal value (max or min) for the current window.  Record this value.


## References

1. [Monotonic Queue](https://jojozhuang.github.io/algorithm/data-structure-monotonic-queue/)